# SfN-2024
Poster + Virtual submission for Society for Neuroscience 2024

Abstract:
The orofacial sensorimotor cortex plays an important role in controlling tongue and jaw movements in complex behaviors such as speaking and eating. Being able to reliably perform these movements has critical implications for people suffering from neurological diseases such as stroke, Alzheimer’s disease, or Parkinson’s disease, which are known to affect orofacial functions. Which features of the complex lingual function drive motor cortical activity is still poorly understood. Here we investigate how information in the orofacial primary motor cortex (MIo) varies based on factors such as absence of tactile sensation, axis of motion, and specific regions of the tongue. To answer this question, we tracked marker-based movements of the tongue and jaw while recording neural activity from implanted microelectrode arrays in MIo of two rhesus macaques (Macaca mulatta) engaged in feeding. We tested various machine learning models to predict tongue and jaw positions and found that long short-term memory neural networks had the best performance. Decoding accuracies of models based on (i) axis of motion, i.e., antero-posterior (x-axis), supero-inferior (y-axis), and medio-lateral (z-axis), (ii) tongue marker region (superficial or deep, anterior vs. intermediate vs. posterior), and (iii) local anesthesia applied to sensory branches of the trigeminal nerve, were then compared to evaluate the ability to predict MIo activity. Generally, decoding performance was best when using the supero-inferior tongue position and worst with medio-lateral position (Kruskal Wallis, p<0.05). The effect of tongue marker region was also apparent, as using tongue markers located in the posterior region for movements in the x-axis led to superior model performance (Kruskal Wallis, p<0.05). Model performance did not differ based on the depth of the tongue marker location (Mann-Whitney, p>0.10). Lastly, we found significant differences in model performance between control and nerve block conditions across all motion axes (Mann-Whitney, p<0.05), with the antero-posterior tongue movements showing the largest decrease in performance post-nerve block (p<0.0001). Overall, these findings indicate that information carried by MIo neurons differ as a function of the tongue’s motion axis, region, available tactile information, and varying combinations of these factors. These have important implications for the development of evaluation tools, rehabilitation strategies, and neural prosthesis to restore orolingual function in particular and limb sensorimotor function in general.
